---
categories:
- linux
excerpt: How to configure NFS, perform an NFS mount, and practical usage examples.
header:
  teaser: /assets/images/posts/thumbnails/note.jpg
layout: single
tags:
- etc
- exports
- nfs
- network file system
- apt
- network
- ubuntu
- debian
title: '[Linux] Configuring NFS (+ Usage Examples)'
toc: true
redirect_from:
- /documents/linux/nfs/
- /legacy/nfs/
- /documents/linux/nfs
- /legacy/nfs
---
This post covers how to configure NFS and provides usage examples.<br>
I use Ubuntu Desktop, but Red Hat-based OSes are not significantly different.<br>
Only the specific commands might vary slightly; the overall workflow is the same across Linux OSes.<br>

## Configuring NFS

### What is NFS?

NFS stands for Network File System.<br>
Naturally, it requires an established network to function.<br>
As the name suggests, it allows you to access a file system over a network address.<br>

As expected, because it is based on network communication, there is a <span style="{{ site.code }}">server</span> and a <span style="{{ site.code }}">client</span>, and their setup methods differ.<br>

### Configuring NFS: Server

Install the NFS package for the server:<br>
<span style="{{ site.code }}">$ sudo apt install nfs-kernel-server</span><br>

Once the package installation is complete, the <span style="{{ site.code }}">/etc/exports</span> file is generated.<br>
The server needs to know which file paths to allow access to and the addresses of the clients.<br>

Modify the <span style="{{ site.code }}">/etc/exports</span> file.<br>

Modifying the exports file (example):
```
$ sudo vi /etc/exports
```
```
# /etc/exports: the access control list for filesystems which may be exported
#               to NFS clients.  See exports(5).
#
# Example for NFSv2 and NFSv3:
# /srv/homes       hostname1(rw,sync,no_subtree_check) hostname2(ro,sync,no_subtree_check)
#
# Example for NFSv4:
# /srv/nfs4        gss/krb5i(rw,sync,fsid=0,crossmnt,no_subtree_check)
# /srv/nfs4/homes  gss/krb5i(rw,sync,no_subtree_check)
#

/home/how2flow 192.168.0.*(rw,sync,no_root_squash,no_subtree_check)
```
<br>

Looking at the contents:<br>
<span style="{{ site.code }}">/home/how2flow</span> means that all files in the server's <span style="{{ site.code }}">/home/how2flow</span> directory will be exported.<br>
<span style="{{ site.code }}">192.168.0.*(rw,sync,no_root_squash,no_subtree_check)</span> specifies<br>
the client IP address range and the file system access options (in parentheses).<br>

Among the options,<br>
<span style="{{ site.code }}">no_root_squash</span> is an option that allows the client to have root privileges.<br>

As you can see from the configuration, wildcards are permitted.<br>
Therefore, you can write the client section like this:<br>
<span style="{{ site.code }}">*(rw,sync,no_root_squash,no_subtree_check)</span>

Of course, allowing only a specific client is also possible:<br>
<span style="{{ site.code }}">192.168.11.75(rw,sync,no_root_squash,no_subtree_check)</span>

Once you have finished modifying the file, apply the settings:
```
$ sudo exportfs -ra
```
<br>

The server configuration is complete.<br>
What remains is how to access the server's file system from the client.<br>

### Accessing NFS: Client

Install the NFS package for the client:<br>
<span style="{{ site.code }}">$ sudo apt install nfs-common</span><br>

Once the server configuration for the client is complete, you can <span style="{{ site.code }}">mount</span> it using the following command:
```
$ sudo mount -t nfs <server_ip>:/<file_path>
```
<br>

For example, if you want to access <span style="{{ site.code }}">/home/how2flow/Pictures</span> on the server,<br>
and the server's IP address is <span style="{{ site.code }}">192.168.0.2</span>:
```
$ sudo mount -t nfs 192.168.0.2://home/how2flow/Pictures
```
<br>

Check the files from the location where you executed the command:
```
$ ls
Pictures
```
<br>

Now you can access the server's Pictures directory.<br>

#### Additional Explanation of mount

Linux supports a feature called <span style="{{ site.code }}">mount</span>.<br>
It is a function that mounts other file systems or hardware devices onto the existing file system.<br>

When you connect a storage device like a USB or SSD, you can mount it by partition to a specific directory.<br>

The command usage is as follows:
```
$ sudo mount [OPTION] <source> <destination>
```
<br>

For more detailed information, please refer to:
```
$ mount --help
```
<br>

## Usage Examples

We've looked at how to configure <span style="{{ site.code }}">nfs</span> and how to use it on a client.<br>
However, if you Google it, this is usually as far as the information goes.<br>

So, I will add some practical usage examples.<br>
I will introduce the scenarios where I primarily use it.<br>

### Installing an Embedded Linux Kernel

As an embedded developer working with Linux kernels, I think I've used it most often when testing kernels.<br>

There are two main ways to install a kernel on an embedded device:<br>

```
1. Cross-compile on a PC, then install the kernel on the embedded storage device.
2. Perform a native install directly on the embedded device.
```

I believe both methods have their pros and cons.<br>

The advantage of method 1 is that the kernel build is much faster than method 2.<br>
However, every time you build/install the kernel, you have to <span style="{{ site.code }}">power off the embedded device, remove the SD card,<br>
connect the SD card to the PC,</span> and execute the install command.
```
$ cd linux
$ make "target's defconfig"
$ sudo make ARCH=arm64 CROSS_COMPILE=aarch64-linux-gnu- INSTALL_MOD_PATH=/dev/disk4/rootfs -j$(nproc) modules_install
```
<br>

Method 2, conversely, allows for immediate installation, but the build time is painfully slow.<br>
However, by using <span style="{{ site.code }}">nfs</span>, you can combine the best of both worlds.<br>

First, build the kernel on the server (PC, <span style="{{ site.code }}">192.168.0.2</span>).
```
$ cd linux
$ sudo make ARCH=arm64 CROSS_COMPILE=aarch64-linux-gnu- -j$(nproc)
```
<br>

Mount the NFS on the client (Embedded) device and proceed with a native install.
```
$ mkdir linux
$ sudo mount -t nfs 192.168.0.2://home/how2flow/linux ./linux
$ cd linux
$ sudo make modules_install && sudo make install
```
<br>

By doing this, you can build the kernel quickly,<br>
and perform the kernel installation while the embedded device system is powered on.<br>

### Other Examples

This is my primary use case,<br>
but I will share other good use cases if I discover them in the future.<br>
